---
layout: post
# title: Deming (2023) 
date: 2023-06-16
description: "[06/16/23] Why Do Wages Grow Faster for Educated Workers?"
img: assets/img/POTD/Deming2023F7.png
importance: 2
tags: labor
category: Paper of the Day (POTD)
---
See paper [here](https://cowles.yale.edu/sites/default/files/2023-06/Deming_OJL_June2023.pdf).
Retrieved 06/15/2023.

### Comments
- Descriptive statistics and the right regressions can take you very far.
- Seperate: 
  - jobs with higher wages / jobs that increase your human capital for a given work experience
  - pre-market school intervention on earnings / post-market on-the-job learning on earnings*
  - wage growth: within- / between-job components
  - sorting or ability bias (workers with higher learning ability $$\alpha$$ will spend more time in school regardless of their occupation, and wage growth is increasing in learning) / returns to scale in learning (wages grow faster in complex jobs even after conditioning on learning ability and completed schooling)

### Main Findings
1. The college wage premium doubles over the life cycle, e.g., from 27 percent at age 25 to 60 percent at age 55 in the U.S.
2. This growth is primarily explained by occupational sorting. In particular, early career occupational sorting explains at least half of the life cycle growth in the college wage premium. (Right after graduation, educated workers are more likely to switch jobs than non-educated workers, but less likely to switch thereafter $$\Rightarrow$$ the rising college premium is mostly explained by wage growth within rather than between jobs.) 
3. The Mincer earnings function substantially understates the life cycle return to education, linearly interacting education with work experience works better.
4. For college graduates, job mobility increases net wage growth only right after completing schooling, and the correlation turns negative after mid-career. For high school graduates, total and within-job wage growth are nearly identical throughout life.
5. College educated workers sort into nonroutine occupations shortly after completing schooling, whereas the occupation mix changes very little for workers after they finish high school.
6. There is a negative correlation between wage growth speed and occupation routineness.

### Data
- Annual or biennial individual education and premarket skills, employment, wages and earnings, and occupation and employer history from:
1. 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79): a nationally representative sample of 11,406 youth ages 14 to 22 in 1979.
2. 1997 NLSY (NLSY97): a nationally representative sample of 8,984 youth age 12 to 17 in 1997.
    - $$\Rightarrow$$ (Fractional) measures of yearly work experience, with one year equalling 2,080 hours (52 weeks times 40 hours per week).
- Inflation-adjusted log hourly wage
- Measure of cognitive skill: Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) scores age-normed mapped across waves.


### Model
Existing economic models of human capital and wage determination are unsatisfactory in light of these results.
- Mincer: workers maximize the present discounted value of lifetime earnings by working and investing in human capital, and the rate of return to investment is constant over time for individuals.
- Supply-demand-institutions (SDI) canonical framework: low- and high-skilled labor groups are taken as given, and the college wage premium is determined by the race between growing relative supply of college graduates and growing relative demand from skill-biased technology.

<blockquote style="color: #00356B; margin: 32px; font-size: inherit;">
Goldin and Katz (2018) argue that the sharp rise in U.S. wage dispersion since 1980 has involved a large increase in between-group wage differentials driven by a rise in the returns to education and a large increase in within-group (residual) wage inequality (p. 52). On the demand side, the rising demand for highly educated and more-skilled workers relative to less educated workers is driven primarily by 1> skill-biased technological changes and 2> increased global trade that outsources lower-skilled work. On the supply side, there is a slowing down in the growth rate of supply due to a slower rate of increase in the educational attainment of successive cohorts born after 1950, changes in entering labor force cohort size, and an increased rate of unskilled immigration. The author also notes the changes in labor market institutions can reconcile preferences patterns in the skill premium when the simple supply-demand model falls short. However, the majority of the evolution of wage differentials can be explained using the simple supply-demand framework (p. 293). (Excerpt from my midterm answer for GLBL6140 at Yale.)
</blockquote>

In this paper, Deming extends Ben-Porath (1967) to allow for heterogeneous learning ability and job complexity.

The worker's problem:

$$
\begin{gathered}
\max_s \sum_{t=1}^T \beta^{t-1} w_{k t}\left(1-s_t\right) \\
\text { s.t. } s_t=1-l_{k t} ; 0 \leq l_{k t} \leq 1 ; 0 \leq s_t \leq 1 \\
w_{k t}=w\left(h_t, A_{k t}, \overrightarrow{L_{k t}}, \sigma\right)
\end{gathered}
$$

where $$k$$ indexes occupations and $$t$$ indexes years, and $$\beta$$ is a discount factor. Workers retire exogenously at time $$T>t$$ and choose skill investment $$s$$ to maximize the present discounted value of lifetime earnings (wages $$w_{k t}$$ times labor supply $$l_{k t}$$), subject to a time allocation constraint. Wages depend on human capital $$h_t$$, but also on occupation skill prices $$A_{k t}$$, total labor supplied in the aggregate economy to each occupation type $$\overrightarrow{L_{k t}}$$, and the elasticity of substitution between occupations $$\sigma$$.

Time at work increases earnings, but skill investment increases earnings potential. The production function for human capital is:

$$
h_{k t+1}=h_{k t}+\alpha\left(s_t h_{k t}\right)^{\theta_k}
$$

with $$0<\theta_k<1$$ and $$h_{k 1}>0$$ by assumption. Future human capital is a function of current human capital and time spent investing $$\left(s_t\right)$$. The scale parameter $$\alpha>0$$ represents the worker's learning ability with individual subscripts suppressed for notational convenience. Faster learners acquire more human capital per unit of time invested. The share parameter $$\theta_k$$ represents the output elasticity of investment in human capital, and is specific to occupation $$k$$. Jobs with higher $$\theta_k$$ allow for greater returns to scale in human capital investment.

Equilibria with one occupation ($$\theta_k=\theta$$) or two occupations (routine or complex, $$\theta_c>\theta_r$$) are discussed.